 Earth's energy budget- wikipedia Earth's energy budget

 Jump to: navigation, search Earth's climate is largely determined by the planet's energy budget, i.e., the balance of incoming and outgoing radiation. It is measured by satellites and shown in W/ m. Earth's energy budget accounts for the balance between energy Earth receives from the Sun, and energy Earth radiates back into outer space after having been distributed throughout the five components of Earth's climate system and having thus powered the so- called`` Earth's heat engine''. This system is made up of earth's water, ice, atmosphere, rocky crust, and all living things.

 Quantifying changes in these amounts is required to accurately model the Earth's climate.

 Play media Incoming, top- of- atmosphere( TOA) shortwave flux radiation, shows energy received from the sun( Jan26--27,2012). Play media Outgoing, longwave flux radiation at the top- of- atmosphere( Jan26--27,2012). Heat energy radiated from Earth( in watts per square metre) is shown in shades of yellow, red, blue and white. The brightest- yellow areas are the hottest and are emitting the most energy out to space, while the dark blue areas and the bright white clouds are much colder, emitting the least energy. Received radiation is unevenly distributed over the planet, because the Sun heats equatorial regions more than polar regions. The atmosphere and ocean work non-stop to even out solar heating imbalances through evaporation of surface water, convection, rainfall, winds, and ocean circulation. Earth is very close to be( but not perfectly) in radiative equilibrium, the situation where the incoming solar energy is balanced by an equal flow of heat to space; under that condition, global temperatures will be relatively stable. Globally, over the course of the year, the Earth system-- land surfaces, oceans, and atmosphere-- absorbs and then radiates back to space an average of about240 watts of solar power per square meter. Anything that increases or decreases the amount of incoming or outgoing energy will change global temperatures in response.

 However, Earth's energy balance and heat fluxes depend on many factors, such as atmospheric composition( mainly aerosols and greenhouse gases), the albedo( reflectivity) of surface properties, cloud cover and vegetation and land use patterns.

 Changes in surface temperature due to Earth's energy budget do not occur instantaneously, due to the inertia of the oceans and the cryosphere. The net heat flux is buffered primarily by becoming part of the ocean's heat content, until a new equilibrium state is established between radiative forcings and the climate response.



 Contents

( hide)1 Energy budget1.1 Incoming radiant energy( shortwave)1.2 Earth's internal heat and other small effects1.3 Longwave radiation2 Earth's energy imbalance2.1 Indirect measurement2.2 Direct measurement3 Natural greenhouse effect4 Climate sensitivity4.1 Climate forcings and global warming5 See also6 References7 External links

 Energy budget( edit)

 A Sankey diagram illustrating the Earth's energy budget described in this section-- line thickness is linearly proportional to relative amount of energy. In spite of the enormous transfers of energy into and from the Earth, it maintains a relatively constant temperature because, as a whole, there is few net gain or loss: Earth emits via atmospheric and terrestrial radiation( shifted to longer electromagnetic wavelengths) to space the about same amount of energy as it receives via insolation( all forms of electromagnetic radiation).

 To quantify Earth's heat budget or heat balance, let the insolation received at the top of the atmosphere be100 units(100 units= about1,360 watts per square meter facing the sun), as shown in the accompanying illustration. Called the albedo of Earth, around35 units are reflected back to space:27 from the top of clouds,2 from snow and ice- covered areas, and6 by other parts of the atmosphere. The65 remaining units are absorbed:14 within the atmosphere and51 by the Earth's surface. These51 units are radiated to space in the form of terrestrial radiation:17 directly radiated to space and34 absorbed by the atmosphere(19 through latent heat of condensation,9 via convection and turbulence, and6 directly absorbed). The48 units absorbed by the atmosphere(34 units from terrestrial radiation and14 from insolation) are finally radiated back to space. These65 units(17 from the ground and48 from the atmosphere) balance the65 units absorbed from the sun in order to maintain zero net gain of energy by the Earth.

 Incoming radiant energy( shortwave)( edit)

 The total amount of energy received per second at the top of Earth's atmosphere( TOA) is measured in watts and is given by the solar constant times the cross-sectional area of the Earth. Because the surface area of a sphere is four times the cross-sectional surface area of a sphere( i.e. the area of a circle), the average TOA flux is one quarter of the solar constant and so is approximately340 W/ m2. Since the absorption varies with location as well as with diurnal, seasonal and annual variations, the numbers quoted are long- term averages, typically averaged from multiple satellite measurements.

 Of the~340 W/ m2 of solar radiation received by the Earth, an average of~77 W/ m2 is reflected back to space by clouds and the atmosphere and~23 W/ m2 is reflected by the surface albedo, leaving~240 W/ m2 of solar energy input to the Earth's energy budget. This gives the earth a mean net albedo of0.29.

 Earth's internal heat and other small effects( edit)

 The geothermal heat flux from the Earth's interior is estimated to be47 terawatts. This comes to0.087 watt/ square metre, which represents only0.027% of Earth's total energy budget at the surface, which is dominated by173,000 terawatts of incoming solar radiation.

 Human production of energy is even lower, at an estimated18 TW.

 Photosynthesis has a larger effect: photosynthetic efficiency turns up to2% of incoming sunlight into biomass, for an estimated70 TW absorbed round the year.

 Other minor sources of energy are usually ignored in these calculations, including accretion of interplanetary dust and solar wind, light from stars other than the Sun and the thermal radiation from space. Earlier, Joseph Fourier had claimed that deep space radiation was significant in a paper often cited as the first on the greenhouse effect.

 Longwave radiation( edit)

 Main article: Outgoing longwave radiation Longwave radiation is usually defined as outgoing infrared energy leaving the planet. However, the atmosphere absorbs parts initially, or cloud cover can reflect radiation. Generally, heat energy is transported between the planet's surface layers( land and ocean) to the atmosphere, transported via evapotranspiration and latent heat fluxes or conduction/ convection processes. Ultimately, energy is radiated in the form of longwave infrared radiation back into space.

 Recent satellite observations indicate additional precipitation, which is sustained by increased energy leaving the surface through evaporation( the latent heat flux), offsetting increases in longwave flux to the surface.

 Earth's energy imbalance( edit)

 If the incoming energy flux is not equal to the outgoing energy flux, net heat is added to or lost by the planet( if the incoming flux is larger or smaller than the outgoing respectively).

 Indirect measurement( edit)

 An imbalance must show in something on Earth warming or cooling( depending on the direction of the imbalance), and the ocean being the larger thermal reservoir on Earth, is a prime candidate for measurements.

 Earth's energy imbalance measurements provided by Argo floats have detected an accumulation of ocean heat content( OHC). The estimated imbalance was measured during a deep solar minimum of2005-2010 to be0.58±0.15 W/ m2. Later research estimated the surface energy imbalance to be0.60±0.17 W/ m2.

 Direct measurement( edit)

 Several satellites indirectly measure the energy absorbed and radiated by Earth and by inference the energy imbalance. The NASA Earth Radiation Budget Experiment( ERBE) project involves three such satellites: the Earth Radiation Budget Satellite( ERBS), launched October1984; NOAA-9, launched December1984; and NOAA-10, launched September1986.

 Today NASA's satellite instruments, provided by CERES, part of the NASA's Earth Observing System( EOS), are designed to measure both solar- reflected and Earth- emitted radiation.

 Natural greenhouse effect( edit)

 Diagram showing the energy budget of Earth's atmosphere, which includes the greenhouse effect See also: Greenhouse effect The major atmospheric gases( oxygen and nitrogen) are transparent to incoming sunlight but are also transparent to outgoing thermal( infrared) radiation. However, water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane and other trace gases are opaque to many wavelengths of thermal radiation. The Earth's surface radiates the net equivalent of17 percent of the incoming solar energy in the form of thermal infrared. However, the amount that directly escapes to space is only about12 percent of incoming solar energy. The remaining fraction,5 to6 percent, is absorbed by the atmosphere by greenhouse gas molecules.

 Atmospheric gases only absorb some wavelengths of energy but are transparent to others. The absorption patterns of water vapor( blue peaks) and carbon dioxide( pink peaks) overlap in some wavelengths. Carbon dioxide is not as strong a greenhouse gas as water vapor, but it absorbs energy in wavelengths(12--15 micrometres) that water vapor does not, partially closing the`` window'' through which heat radiated by the surface would normally escape to space.( Illustration NASA, Robert Rohde) When greenhouse gas molecules absorb thermal infrared energy, their temperature rises. Those gases then radiate an increased amount of thermal infrared energy in all directions. Heat radiated upward continues to encounter greenhouse gas molecules; those molecules also absorb the heat, and their temperature rises and the amount of heat they radiate increases. The atmosphere thins with altitude, and at roughly5--6 kilometres, the concentration of greenhouse gases in the overlying atmosphere is so thin that heat can escape to space.

 Because greenhouse gas molecules radiate infrared energy in all directions, some of it spreads downward and ultimately returns to the Earth's surface, where it is absorbed. The Earth's surface temperature is thus higher than it would be if it were heated only by direct solar heating. This supplemental heating is the natural greenhouse effect. It is as if the Earth is covered by a blanket that allows high frequency radiation( sunlight) to enter, but slows the rate at which the low frequency infrared radiant energy emitted by the Earth leaves.

 Climate sensitivity( edit)

 Main article: Radiative forcing A change in the incident radiated portion of the energy budget is referred to as a radiative forcing.

 Climate sensitivity is the steady state change in the equilibrium temperature as a result of changes in the energy budget.

 Climate forcings and global warming( edit)

 Expected Earth energy imbalance for three choices of aerosol climate forcing. Measured imbalance, close to0.6 W/ m2, implies that aerosol forcing is close to−1.6 W/ m2.( Credit: NASA/ GISS) Climate forcings are changes that cause temperatures to rise or fall, disrupting the energy balance. Natural climate forcings include changes in the Sun's brightness, Milankovitch cycles( small variations in the shape of Earth's orbit and its axis of rotation that occur over thousands of years) and volcanic eruptions that inject light- reflecting particles as high as the stratosphere. Man- made forcings include particle pollution( aerosols) that absorb and reflect incoming sunlight; deforestation, which changes how the surface reflects and absorbs sunlight; and the rising concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, which decreases the rate at which heat is radiated to space.

 A forcing can trigger feedbacks that intensify( positive feedback) or weaken( negative feedback) the original forcing. For example, loss of ice at the poles, which makes them less reflective, causes greater absorption of energy and so increases the rate at which the ice melts, is an example of a positive feedback.

 The observed planetary energy imbalance during the recent solar minimum shows that solar forcing of climate, although natural and significant, is overwhelmed by anthropogenic climate forcing.

 In2012, NASA scientists reported that to stop global warming atmospheric CO content would have to be reduced to350 ppm or less, assuming all other climate forcings were fixed. The impact of anthropogenic aerosols has not been quantified, but individual aerosol types are thought to have substantial heating and cooling effects.

 See also( edit)

 Planetary equilibrium temperature Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System References( edit)

^ Jump up to:`` The NASA Earth's Energy Budget Poster''. NASA. Jump up^ Earth's internal heat and other small effects, that are indeed taken into consideration, are thousand times smaller; see below Jump up^ IPCC AR5 WG1 Glossary2013`` energy budget( of the earth)'' Jump up^ AR4 SYR Synthesis Report Annexes. Ipcc.ch. Retrieved on2011-06-28.^ Jump up to: Graeme L. Stephens; Juilin Li; Martin Wild; Carol Anne Clayson; Norman Loeb; Seiji Kato; Tristan L'Ecuyer; Paul W. Stackhouse Jr; Matthew Lebsock& Timothy Andrews( September23,2012).`` An update on Earth's energy balance in light of the latest global observations''( PDF). Nature Geoscience. Bibcode:2012NatGe...5...691S. doi:10.1038/ NGEO1580. Jump up^ Lindsey, Rebecca(2009).`` Climate and Earth's Energy Budget''. NASA Earth Observatory. Jump up^ M, Previdi; et al.(2013).`` Climate sensitivity in the Anthropocene''. Royal Meteorological Society. Bibcode:2013QJRMS.139.1121 P. doi:10.1002/ qj.2165.^ Jump up to: SM Reddy; SJ Chary. University Botany II:( Gymnosperms, Plant Anatomy, Genetics, Ecology). New Age International. Retrieved9 December2015. PD Sharma. Environmental Biology. Rastogi Publications. Retrieved9 December2015. PD Sharma. Environmental Biology& Toxicology. Rastogi Publications. Retrieved9 December2015. Jump up^ Wild, Martin; Folini, Doris; Schär, Christoph; Loeb, Norman; Dutton, Ellsworth; König- Langlo, Gert(2013). The Earth's radiation balance and its representation in CMIP5 models. Copernicus. Bibcode:2013EGUGA...15.1286 W. Jump up^ Davies, J.H.,& Davies, D.R.(2010). Earth's surface heat flux. Solid Earth,1(1),5--24. Jump up^ Archer, D.(2012). Global Warming: Understanding the Forecast. ISBN978-0-470-94341-0. Jump up^ Connolley, William M.(18 May2003).`` William M. Connolley's page about Fourier1827: MEMOIRE sur les temperatures du globe terrestre et des espaces planetaires''. William M. Connolley. Retrieved5 July2010.^ Jump up to: James Hansen; Makiko Sato; Pushker Kharecha; Karina von Schuckmann( January2012).`` Earth's Energy Imbalance''. NASA. Jump up^ Stephens, Graeme L.; Li, Juilin; Wild, Martin; Clayson, Carol Anne; Loeb, Norman; Kato, Seiji; L'Ecuyer, Tristan; Stackhouse Jr., Paul W.; Lebsock, Matthew(2012-10-01).`` An update on Earth's energy balance in light of the latest global observations''. Nature Geoscience.5(10):691--696. Bibcode:2012NatGe...5...691S. ISSN1752-0894. doi:10.1038/ ngeo1580. Jump up^ Effect of the Sun's Energy on the Ocean and Atmosphere(1997) Jump up^ B.A. Wielicki; et al.(1996).`` Mission to Planet Earth: Role of Clouds and Radiation in Climate''. Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc.77(5):853--868. Bibcode:1996BAMS...77...853W. doi:10.1175/1520-0477(1996)077<0853: CATERE>2.0.CO;2.^ Jump up to: Edited quote from public- domain source: Lindsey, R.( January14,2009), The Atmosphere's Energy Budget( page6), in: Climate and Earth's Energy Budget: Feature Articles, Earth Observatory, part of the EOS Project Science Office, located at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center^ Jump up to:`` NASA: Climate Forcings and Global Warming''. January14,2009. Jump up^`` NASA GISS: Science Brief: Earth's Energy Imbalance''. www.giss.nasa.gov. Retrieved2017-04-10. External links( edit)

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Earth's energy budget. NASA: The Atmosphere's Energy Budget Clouds and Earth's Radiant Energy System( CERES) NASA/ GEWEX Surface Radiation Budget( SRB) Project Global warming and climate change Temperatures Brightness temperature Effective temperature Geologic record Hiatus Historical climatology Instrumental record Paleoclimatology Paleotempestology Proxy data Record of the past1,000 years Satellite measurements Causes Anthropogenic Attribution of recent climate change Aviation Biofuel Black carbon Carbon dioxide Deforestation Earth's energy budget Earth's radiation balance Ecocide Fossil fuel Global dimming Global warming potential Greenhouse effect( Infrared window) Greenhouse gases( Halocarbons) Land use, land- use change and forestry Radiative forcing Tropospheric ozone Urban heat island Natural Albedo Bond events Climate oscillations Climate sensitivity Cloud forcing Cosmic rays Feedbacks Glaciation Global cooling Milankovitch cycles Ocean variability AMO ENSO IOD PDO Orbital forcing Solar variation Volcanism Models Global climate model History History of climate change science Atmospheric thermodynamics Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling Opinion and climate change Environmental ethics Media coverage of climate change Public opinion on climate change( Popular culture) Scientific opinion on climate change Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment Climate change denial Global warming conspiracy theory By country& region( Africa Arctic Argentina Australia Bangladesh Belgium Canada China Europe European Union Finland Grenada Japan Luxembourg New Zealand Norway Russia Scotland South Korea Sweden Tuvalu United Kingdom United States) Politics Clean Power Plan Climate change denial( Manufactured controversy) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change( IPCC) March for Science People's Climate March United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change( UNFCCC/ FCCC) Global climate regime Potential effects and issues General Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic dipole anomaly Arctic haze Arctic methane release Climate change and agriculture Climate change and ecosystems Climate change and poverty Current sea level rise Drought Economics of global warming Effect on plant biodiversity Effects on health Effects on humans Effects on marine mammals Environmental migrant Extinction risk from global warming Fisheries and climate change Forest dieback Industry and society Iris hypothesis Megadrought Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Physical impacts Polar stratospheric cloud Regime shift Retreat of glaciers since1850 Runaway climate change Season creep Shutdown of thermohaline circulation By country Australia India Nepal( South Asia) United States Mitigation Kyoto Protocol Clean Development Mechanism Joint Implementation Bali Road Map2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference Governmental European Climate Change Programme G8 Climate Change Roundtable United Kingdom Climate Change Programme Paris Agreement United States withdrawal Regional climate change initiatives in the United States List of climate change initiatives Emissions reduction Carbon credit Carbon- neutral fuel Carbon offset Carbon tax Emissions trading Fossil- fuel phase- out Carbon- free energy Carbon capture and storage Efficient energy use Low- carbon economy Nuclear power Renewable energy Personal Individual action on climate change Simple living Other Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sink Climate change mitigation scenarios Climate engineering Individual and political action on climate change Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation Reforestation Urban reforestation Climate Action Plan Climate action Proposed adaptations Strategies Damming glacial lakes Desalination Drought tolerance Irrigation investment Rainwater storage Sustainable development Weather modification Programmes Avoiding dangerous climate change Land allocation decision support system Glossary of climate change Index of climate change articles Category: Climate change Category: Global warming Portal: Global warming Global human population Major topics Biocapacity Optimum population Overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Population Population ethics Population momentum Sustainable development Women's reproductive rights Zero population growth Biological and related topics Family planning Pledge two or fewer Human population planning One- child policy Two- child policy Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population growth Population model Population pyramid Projections of population growth Human impact on the environment Deforestation Desalination Desertification Environmental impact of agriculture of aviation of biodiesel of concrete of electricity generation of the energy industry of fishing of irrigation of mining of off- roading of oil shale industry of palm oil of paper of the petroleum industry of reservoirs of shipping of war Industrialisation Land degradation Land reclamation Overconsumption Pollution Quarrying Urbanization Loss of green belts Urban sprawl Waste Water scarcity Overdrafting Population ecology Carrying capacity Deep ecology Earth's energy budget Food security Habitat destruction I= P× A× T Malthusian growth model Overshoot( population) World energy consumption World energy resources World3 model Literature A Modest Proposal Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc. An Essay on the Principle of Population`` How Much Land Does a Man Need?'' Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits The Limits to Growth The Population Bomb The Skeptical Environmentalist The Ultimate Resource Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Metropolitan areas by population Population milestone babies Events and organizations7 Billion Actions International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters Population Research Institute United Nations Population Fund Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Classic Maya collapse Fertility and intelligence Green Revolution Holocene extinction Migration Commons Human overpopulation Human activities with impact on the environment Human migration Retrieved from`` https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Earth%27s_energy_budget&oldid=795644989'' Categories: Energy Climate forcing Earth Earth sciences Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June2017 Use dmy dates from July2011 Articles containing video clips



 Talk











 Contents

 About Wikipedia







 Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français Galego Magyar Nederlands日本語 Norsk Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча RomânăРусский Suomi TürkçeУкраїнська中文 Edit links This page was last edited on15 August2017, at15:40. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution- ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. About Wikipedia